feat(instance): new how-to configure a custom IPv6 within a given prefix (#4341)
scaleway/docs-content: pages/instances/how-to/use-flexips.mdx

When creating an Instance, you have options for network connectivity:

> - **Flexible Routed IPv4 addresses**: These are public IPv4 addresses routed directly to your Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Flexible routed IPv4 addresses**: public IPv4 addresses routed directly to your Instance.
```

    The flexible IP is deleted. If it was attached to an Instance, that Instance now has no public IP address.

## Flexible IPv6

### About routed IPv6

> Since [mid 2023](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/ip-mobility-removing-nat/), we built a new network stack for Scaleway Instances to enable new features. One of those is the ability to have Flexible/Reserved IPv6 whose main purpose is to allow to keep the same IPv6 whenever you stop/start your Instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since [mid 2023](https://www.scaleway.com/en/blog/ip-mobility-removing-nat/), we built a new network stack for Scaleway Instances to enable new features. One of those is the ability to have flexible/reserved IPv6 whose main purpose is to allow to keep the same IPv6 whenever you stop/start your Instance.
```

> Prior to routed IPs, IPv6 addresses were statically routed to the Hypervisors, which means your IP changed depending on which Hypervisor your Instance was running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before routed IPs, IPv6 addresses were statically routed to the hypervisors, which means your IP changed depending on which hypervisor your Instance was running on.
```

### IPv6 prefix and SLAAC

> Now let's dive into the routed IPv6. Whenever you book a `routed_ipv6` IP type, you get assigned a full IPv6 prefix of 64bits length. According to the [section 2.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291#section-2.4) of the RFC4291, except a few prefixes, anything is a Global Unicast  address type. Today's [best practice](https://www.ripe.net/publications/docs/ripe-690/#4-1-1---64-prefix-from-a-dedicated-pool-of-ipv6-prefixes) is to provide a /64 prefix.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, let's dive into the routed IPv6. Whenever you book a `routed_ipv6` IP type, you get assigned a full IPv6 prefix of 64 bits length. According to [section 2.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4291#section-2.4) of the RFC4291, except for a few prefixes, anything is a Global Unicast address type. Today's [best practice](https://www.ripe.net/publications/docs/ripe-690/#4-1-1---64-prefix-from-a-dedicated-pool-of-ipv6-prefixes) is to provide a /64 prefix.
```

Another reason we decided to provide you with a /64 prefix is to be able to use [SLAAC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4862) as the configuration mechanism. But SLAAC has been designed to work [exclusively with /64 prefixes](https://notes.networklessons.com/ipv6-prefix-length-used-for-slaac).

> We chose SLAAC over DHCPv6 because it doesn't require any client-side configuration in most of the cases, allowing the feature to work with old instances too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose SLAAC over DHCPv6 because it doesn't require any client-side configuration in most cases, allowing the feature to work with old instances too.
```

```
        {
            "address": null,
            "id": "153e451e-866b-4f58-9241-3bdbe98a0175",
            "ipam_id": "a81665be-0059-431f-bf44-8d7bdf1dac01",
            "organization": "8e214357-66e2-43ee-8898-0da03fd869e2",
            "prefix": "2025:bd8:911::/64",
            "project": "8e214357-66e2-43ee-8898-0da03fd869e2",
            "reverse": null,
            "server": null,
            "state": "detached",
            "tags": [],
            "type": "routed_ipv6",
            "zone": "fr-par-1"
        }
```

On the other hand, the `/servers/<id>` endpoint provides the `public_ip` (deprecated) field and its replacement `public_ips`. This struct also contain an address field of type IP that doesn't accept a prefix:

```
[
  {
    "id": "e37b038d-c5f7-4fc7-8ac2-407807f723dd",
    "address": "2025:bd8:911:46:dc00:ff:fe08:ab0c",
    "dynamic": false,
    "gateway": "fe80::dc00:ff:fe08:ab0c",
    "netmask": "64",
    "family": "inet6",
    "provisioning_mode": "slaac",
    "tags": [],
    "state": "attached",
    "ipam_id": "45791fdb-c576-4447-985b-19b45740714b"
  }
]
```

Instead, we return the SLAAC address based on the EUI-64 of the interface.

> One consequence is that, if you move your `routed_ipv6` **prefix** to another instance (hence, with another MAC address), the `public_ips` list will show you a **different** address because its EUI-64 will differ.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
One consequence is that, if you move your `routed_ipv6` **prefix** to another Instance (hence, with another MAC address), the `public_ips` list will show you a **different** address because its EUI-64 will differ.
```

## Workaround

> Since the whole /64 prefix is routed to your Instance, it is possible to define a second IPv6 address within the prefix that may be used to reach your instance. However, this requires some custom settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since the whole /64 prefix is routed to your Instance, it is possible to define a second IPv6 address within the prefix that may be used to reach your Instance. However, this requires some custom settings.
```

In order to do that, we will use the **cloud-init** mechanism to define the second IPv6 address.

Let's say your prefix is: `2025:bd8:911::/64`

> We will use the following /128 address within this range: `2025:bd8:911:a7f1::1/128`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We will use the following /128 address within this range: `2025:bd8:911:a7f1::1/128`.
```

The cloud-init configuration can be uploaded with the Scaleway CLI:

```
scw instance server update <SERVER_UUID> cloud-init=@ipv6-cloud-init.txt
```

### Debian >= 11 and Ubuntu >= 20.04

> First of all, create a file with the following content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, create a file with the following content:
```

```
cat << EOF > ipv6-cloud-init.txt
#cloud-config
write_files:
  - path: /etc/netplan/100-ipv6-config.yaml
    owner: root
    permissions: '0400'
    content: |
      network:
          ethernets:
              ens2:
                  addresses:
                  - 2025:bd8:911:a7f1::1/128
runcmd:
  - ['netplan', 'apply']
EOF
```

This cloud-init configuration file will add the `netplan` definition of a second IPv6 address within the /64 prefix (you can choose any /128 contained in your prefix). It will then apply the `netplan` configuration so the new IPv6 address becomes available.

### CentOS Stream 9, AlmaLinux >= 8 and RockyLinux >= 8

> For CentOS Stream 9, AlmaLinux >= 8 and RockyLinux >= 8 you need to interact with `NetworkManager` instead of `netplan`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For CentOS Stream 9, AlmaLinux >= 8, and RockyLinux >= 8, you must interact with `NetworkManager` instead of `netplan`.
```
